.\" thermald (8) manual page
.\"
.\" This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
.\" modify it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as
.\" published by the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of
.\" the License, or (at your option) any later version.
.\"
.\" The GNU General Public License's references to "object code"
.\" and "executables" are to be interpreted as the output of any
.\" document formatting or typesetting system, including
.\" intermediate and printed output.
.\"
.\" This manual is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.\" but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.\" MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.\" GNU General Public License for more details.
.\"
.\" You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public Licence along
.\" with this manual; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
.\" 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301, USA.
.\"
.\" Copyright (C) 2012 Intel Corporation. All rights reserved.
.\"
.TH thermald "8" "8 May 2013"

.SH NAME
thermald \- start Linux thermal daemon
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B thermald
.RI " [ " OPTIONS " ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B thermald
is a Linux daemon used to prevent the overheating of platforms. This daemon monitors
temperature and applies compensation using available cooling methods.

By default, it monitors CPU temperature using available CPU digital temperature sensors and maintains CPU temperature under control, before HW takes aggressive correction action.

Thermal daemon looks for thermal sensors and thermal cooling drivers in the Linux thermal sysfs (/sys/class/thermal) and builds a
list of sensors and cooling drivers. Each of the thermal sensors can optionally be binded to a cooling drivers by the in kernel
drivers. In this case the Linux kernel thermal core can directly take actions based on the temperature trip points, for each sensor
and associated cooling device. For example a trip temperature X in a sensor can be associates a cooling driver Y. So when
the sensor temperature = X, the cooling driver "Y" is activated.

Thermal daemon allows one to change this relationship or add new one via a thermal configuration file (thermal-conf.xml). This
file is automatically created (thermal-conf.xml.auto) and used, if the platform has ACPI thermal relationship table.
If not this needs to be manually configured.

For manual configuration refer to the manual page of the thermal-conf.xml.

In some newer platforms the auto creation of the config file is done by a companion tool "dptfxtract". This tool can be downloaded from
"https://github.com/intel/dptfxtract". It is suggested as parts of the install process, run dptfxtract.

There can be multiple configuration files. User can select a configuration file via -config-file option to override the default selection. The default selection picks one of the file in the following order:

- /etc/thermald/thermal-conf.xml.auto

- /var/run/thermald/thermal-conf.xml.auto

- /etc/thermald/thermal-conf.xml

(*Assuming configure prefix=/ is used during build.)

There is another companion tool "ThermalMonitor", which presents a graphical front end. This allows the monitoring of sensors and changing of thermal trips to give the user more control. The source code of "ThermalMonitor" is a part of the thermald github source, in the tools folder.


.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Show help options.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print thermald version and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-no-daemon
Don't become a daemon: Default is daemon mode.
.TP
.B \-\-loglevel=info
log severity: info level and up.
.TP
.B \-\-loglevel=debug
log severity: debug level and up: Max logging.
.TP
.B \-\-poll-interval
Poll interval in seconds: Poll for zone temperature changes.
To disable polling, set to zero. Polling can only be disabled, if available temperature sensors can notify temperature change asynchronously.
.TP
.B \-\-dbus-enable
Enable Dbus.
.TP
.B \-\-exclusive-control
Act as exclusive thermal controller. This will use user-space
governor for thermal sysfs and take over control.
.TP
.B \-\-ignore-cpuid-check
Ignore cpuid check for supported CPU models.
.TP
.B \-\-config-file
Specify thermal-conf.xml path and ignore default thermal-conf.xml.
.TP
.B \-\-ignore-default-control
Ignore default CPU temperature control. Strictly follow thermal-conf.xml or thermal-conf.xml.auto.
.TP
.B \-\-workaround-enabled
Enable special workarounds for RAPL MMIO power limit and TCC offset every 30 seconds. This helps
to disable RAPL MMIO when not used and adjust TCC offset in certain Lenovo laptops.
.TP
.B \-\-disable-active-power
Disable active power management. This will not set active power limits using RAPL MMIO. This
may result in constrained performance, if the system boots up with lower power limits.
.TP
.B \-\-adaptive
Use DPTF adaptive tables when present. This will ignore thermald config via xml files.
.TP
.B \-\-ignore-critical-trip
If the configuration defined a critical temperature point, which is too low, this option
will avoid shutting down the system on reaching this temperature limit.
.TP

.SH SEE ALSO
thermal-conf.xml(5)
